Setting up WiFi on Ubuntu Linux with a TP-Link adapter and Airport Extreme
==========================================================================

The instructions below were written after setting up TP-Link AC1200 Archer T4U
Wireless Dual Band USB Adapter, but they may apply to other Wi-Fi adapters
(with corresponding corrections).

Install the drivers
-------------------

To install afresh::

	$ sudo apt-get install rtl8812au-dkms wireless-tools
	$ sudo service network-manager stop
	$ sudo modprobe -rfv 8812au
	$ sudo modprobe -v 8812au
	$ sudo service network-manager start
	
Check the status of the installation like this::

	$ dkms status
	rtl8812au, 4.3.8.12175.20140902+dfsg, 4.4.0-66-generic, x86_64: installed

At this point the driver is installed and loaded. If you want to recompile existing
build of the driver for the current kernel, first remove the build like so::

	$ sudo dkms remove rtl8812au/4.3.8.12175.20140902+dfsg -k $(uname -r)

Then install the driver (note that you don't need to specify kernel version here)::

	$ sudo dkms install rtl8812au/4.3.8.12175.20140902+dfsg
	$ sudo modprobe 8812au

Check that the device is working
--------------------------------

To see if any wireless devices are visible::

	$ iwconfig
	enx8416f91b54ee  unassociated  Nickname:"<WIFI@REALTEK>"
          Mode:Managed  Frequency=2.412 GHz  Access Point: Not-Associated   
          Sensitivity:0/0  
          Retry:off   RTS thr:off   Fragment thr:off
          Power Management:off
          Link Quality:0  Signal level:0  Noise level:0
          Rx invalid nwid:0  Rx invalid crypt:0  Rx invalid frag:0
          Tx excessive retries:0  Invalid misc:0   Missed beacon:0

If you can see output like above, you're good. Proceed to start this network interface::

	$ sudo ifup enx8416f91b54ee

This should print out several lines showing whether DHCP connection has been established
(and will keep trying on error). Then run::

	$ /etc/init.d/networking restart

To see available access points::

	$ iwlist enx8416f91b54ee scan
	
Expect to see a long list of visible Wi-Fi networks. If the list is empty except
for "No scan results" message, something went wrong (if it's an external USB device,
try unplugging it and plugging it back in).

Configure network (WPA)
-----------------------

For a WPA network (such as my Airport Extreme-based network), the configuration
relies on ``wpa_supplicant`` program. Use ``sudo apt-get install wpasupplicant``
if you don't have it. Then create a file called ``/etc/wpa.conf`` using the 
following command::

	$ sudo wpa_passphrase <NETWORK_ID> <NETWORK_PWD> > /etc/wpa.conf

then modify this file to look like this::

	network={
		ssid="<NETWORK_ID>"
		scan_ssid=1
		proto=WPA RSN
		key_mgmt=WPA-PSK
		pairwise=CCMP TKIP
		group=CCMP TKIP
		auth_alg=OPEN
		psk=<NETWORK_PWD_ENCRYPTED>
	}

(where ``<NETWORK_ID>`` is your network id and ``<NETWORK_PWD_ENCRYPTED>`` is a hexadecimal
representation of your encrypted password generated using ``wpa_passphrase``). 
For better security, restrict access permissions to this file::

	$ sudo chmod 400 /etc/wpa.conf
	
In your ``/etc/network/interfaces`` add the following lines::

	# wireless interace
	auto enx8416f91b54ee
	allow-hotplug enx8416f91b54ee
	iface enx8416f91b54ee inet dhcp
	wpa-conf /etc/wpa.conf
	
Finally, test the connection::

	$ sudo ifup enx8416f91b54ee
	
This should complete fairly quickly, and the last line should be something like
"bound to 10.0.1.11 -- renewal in 35287 seconds". If you see "No DHCPOFFERS received"
message, try to diagnose the problem using ``sudo iwlist <INTERFACE_NAME> scan`` command.

DNS and other config
--------------------

To ensure that ``/run/resolvconf/resolv.conf`` (autogenerated file) is present 
and that ``/etc/resolv.conf`` links to it, add the following lines to
``/etc/resolvconf/resolv.conf.d/base``::

	nameserver 8.8.8.8
	nameserver 8.8.4.4

These are Google DNS servers that should have quite good availability. Note: don't
add ``dns-nameservers`` entry to ``/etc/network/interfaces`` as it is unnecessary
and may interfere with our setup.

Then generate the ``/run/resolvconf/resolv.conf`` file using::

	sudo resolvconf -u

If the symbolic link ``/etc/resolv.conf`` is missing, run::

	sudo dpkg-reconfigure resolvconf

For quicker DHCP lookups on startup (and quicker failure), reduce the timeout
specified in ``/etc/dhcp/dhclient.conf`` from default 300 to something more
reasonable like 60 seconds.


Network Shares
--------------

Mounting network resources such as Airport Extreme disk::

	sudo apt-get install cifs-utils
	sudo mount.cifs //<IP_ADDRESS>/<SHARE_NAME> /media/<SHARE_NAME> -o 'password=<PASSWORD>,sec=ntlm,uid=<USERNAME>'
	
Troubleshooting
---------------

"My Wi-Fi adpater does not work unless I manually unplug it and plug it back in every time after system reboot"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Normally this should be solved by adding the name of the adapter's module (e.g. ``8812au``) to ``/etc/modules``. However, in some instances one is required to reload the module using the following commands::

	sudo modprobe -r 8812au
	sudo modprobe 8812au
	
In that case we can automate this by adding the above lines to ``/etc/rc.local``, right before ``exit 0`` line.

